Okta 569571 Reference Architecture soft launch (#3930)
okta/okta-developer-docs: packages/@okta/vuepress-site/docs/reference/architecture-center/directory-coexistence/lab-tutorial-3-generic-database/index.md

---
title: Migrate users from an on-premises generic database to Universal Directory
---

# Directory Coexistence Tutorial 3: Migrate users from an on-premises generic database to Universal Directory

Suppose you store your user profiles and groups in a generic on-premises database but want to replace it with Universal Directory. In this case, you have two options:

1. You export your user information into a CSV (or similar) file and then import the data from the file into Universal Directory.

> 1. You write a script that queries the database for user information and then uses the [Okta Users API](/docs/reference/api/users/) to import the users into Universal Directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. You write a script that queries the database for user information and then use the [Okta Users API](/docs/reference/api/users/) to import the users into Universal Directory.
```

Author: stet. uses is correct.

> In both cases, Okta can import hashed passwords for users if the hash is one that  [Okta supports](/docs/reference/api/users/#hashed-password-object). If Okta does not support the hash, it will not import the user's password. However, you can use the [Okta Password Inline Import Hook](/docs/reference/password-hook/) to import user records that use an unsupported hash type, without requiring that the user resets their password.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In both cases, Okta can import hashed passwords for users if the hash is one that  [Okta supports](/docs/reference/api/users/#hashed-password-object). If Okta does not support the hash, it will not import the user's password. However, you can use the [Okta Password Inline Import Hook](/docs/reference/password-hook/) to import user records that use an unsupported hash type, without requiring that the user resets their password.
```
```suggestion
In both cases, Okta can import hashed passwords for users if the hash is one that  [Okta supports](/docs/reference/api/users/#hashed-password-object). If Okta does not support the hash, it does not import the user's password. However, you can use the [Okta Password Inline Import Hook](/docs/reference/password-hook/) to import user records that use an unsupported hash type, without requiring that the user resets their password.
```

> **Note:** Just-in-time migration is not supported in this scenario.

> In this tutorial, you will walkthrough the second of these migration options. Specifically, you will:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you'll walk through the second of these migration options. Specifically, you'll:
```

Author: done

1. [Set up the start scenario](#set-up-the-start-scenario).
   Start a simple OIDC-based web application in a docker container that authenticates its user against a generic database server you have started in a second docker container. At this point, Okta is not involved in the authentication flow.
1. [Import users into Universal Directory with the Users API](#import-users-into-universal-directory-with-the-users-api).
   Run a script that queries the database for user information and then imports the users into Universal Directory with the Users API.
1. [Update the application to use Universal Directory](#update-the-application-to-use-universal-directory).
   Configure the web application to use Universal Directory instead of the generic database and test that you can sign in successfully with the imported user profiles.
1. [Account for hash types Okta does not support](#account-for-hash-types-okta-does-not-support).

>    If a user record utilizes a hash type that Okta does not support, the script in step 2 will import the everything in the record into Universal Directory except the user's password. In this step, you use the Okta Password Inline Import Hook to import user records that use an unsupported hash type, without requiring the user to reset their password.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   If a user record utilizes a hash type that Okta does not support, the script in step 2 imports everything in the record into Universal Directory except the user's password. In this step, you use the Okta Password Inline Import Hook to import user records that use an unsupported hash type, without requiring the user to reset their password.
```

   ```bash
   docker compose up
   ```

1. Open a private/incognito browser window and navigate to `http://localhost:8080`. A sign-in dialog appears.

   <div class="half wireframe-border">

   ![A sign-in form with fields for username and password and a next button](/img/wireframes/sign-in-form-username-password.png)

   <!--
   Source image: https://www.figma.com/file/YH5Zhzp66kGCglrXQUag2E/%F0%9F%93%8A-Updated-Diagrams-for-Dev-Docs?node-id=3398%3A36678&t=wzNwSZkdctajVush-1 sign-in-form-username-password
   -->

   </div>

1. Sign in with username **user1@example.com** and password **password**. The following dialog appears after successful authentication:

   <div class="full border">

   ![Sign-in response with welcome home successful authentication response](/img/architecture/directory-coexistence/db-to-okta-successful-signin.png)

   </div>

## Import users into Universal Directory with the Users API

With the basic environment set up, you can:

* [Sign in to your Okta account](#sign-in-to-your-okta-account)
* [Run the import script](#run-the-import-script)

> * [Check the users have imported correctly](#check-the-users-have-imported-correctly)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [Check that the users have imported correctly](#check-the-users-have-imported-correctly)
```

Author: fixed

### Sign in to your Okta account

Stop the currently running containers and sign in to your Okta account.

1. In the `okta-reference-coexistence-db-example` directory, stop the currently running containers with <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>C</kbd>.
1. Run `okta login`.

   ```bash
   okta login
   ```

   If you are already logged into Okta, a prompt similar to the following is returned. The current sign-in configuration is based on the Okta Org URL and API token you provided at your previous okta login command. If you want to use the existing configuration, answer N and skip steps a and b. Otherwise, answer Y and continue to steps a and b.

   ```txt
   An existing Okta Organization (https://dev-133337.okta.com) was found in C:\mydirectory\.okta\okta.yaml
   Overwrite configuration file? [Y/n]
   ```

   a. Enter your `${OKTA_DOMAIN}`. If you do not know your `${OKTA_DOMAIN}`, see [Values and Variables](/docs/reference/architecture-center/directory-coexistence/lab-prerequisites/#values-and-variables).

>    b. Follow the instructions in [Create an API token](/docs/guides/create-an-api-token) to create a token. Once you have the token, enter it at the Okta API token prompt.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   b. Follow the instructions in [Create an API token](/docs/guides/create-an-api-token) to create a token. After you have the token, enter it at the Okta API token prompt.
```

### Run the import script

> Check out the script to import the users and check they have been imported correctly in Universal Directory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check out the script to import the users and check that they have been imported correctly in Universal Directory.
```

Author: fixed

1. Check out the main branch of the `https://github.com/oktadev/okta-reference-coexistence-db-example` repository. The main branch contains a migration script and updates to code in the project to replace the database authentication with OpenID Connect (OIDC).

   ```bash
   git checkout main
   ```

   After a successful checkout, the `okta-reference-coexistence-db-example` directory contains the `pw-import-hook` subdirectory, the `migrate-user.sh` file, and other files and code changes.

1. Restart the containers:

   ```bash
   docker compose start
   ```

1. Run the okta-reference-coexistence-db-example/migrate-users.sh script.

   ```bash
   ./migrate-users.sh
   ```

> This script uses a database query to the database server to get the user profiles, and the [Okta Users API](/docs/reference/api/users/) to import those users into Okta. For this example, three users are defined in `okta-reference-coexistence-db-example/blob/main/sql/03-users.sql`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This script uses a database query to get the user profiles from the database server, and the [Okta Users API](/docs/reference/api/users/) to import those users into Okta. For this example, three users are defined in `okta-reference-coexistence-db-example/blob/main/sql/03-users.sql`.
```

Author: fixed

> The script imports the two users whose passwords are hashed with a hash that Okta supports: `Admin Istrator` and `User One`. The first time the users sign in, their passwords are rehashed and the hashed passwords are git-bstored in Okta Universal Directory using the `POST https://${yourOktaDomain}/api/v1/user`s` Okta API request.

Reviewer: is `git-bstored` correct?  is it just `stored`?

Author: Checking with Brian Demers

> The script imports the two users whose passwords are hashed with a hash that Okta supports: `Admin Istrator` and `User One`. The first time the users sign in, their passwords are rehashed and the hashed passwords are git-bstored in Okta Universal Directory using the `POST https://${yourOktaDomain}/api/v1/user`s` Okta API request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The script imports the two users whose passwords are hashed with a hash that Okta supports: `Admin Istrator` and `User One`. The first time the users sign in, their passwords are rehashed and the hashed passwords are git-bstored in Okta Universal Directory using the `POST https://${yourOktaDomain}/api/v1/users` Okta API request.
```

Reviewer: You may also want to link to this section in Users API: https://developer.okta.com/docs/reference/api/users/#create-user-with-imported-hashed-password

Author: Excellent link. Thank you

There is one more user in the generic database whose password is hashed with a hash that Okta does not support: **User2 Two**. This user is also imported into Universal Directory, but their password is not saved. In order to save a rehashed password the first time they sign in, an additional step is required. This is covered in [Account for hash types Okta does not support](#account-for-hash-types-okta-does-not-support).

> > **Note**: If you are using Windows, use `git-bash` to open a git-bash command window and then run `./migrate-users.sh` in the this window. Type `exit` to close it. The remainder of the example is performed in the original command window, not the git-bash command window.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note**: If you are using Windows, use `git-bash` to open a git-bash command window and then run `./migrate-users.sh` in the this window. Type `exit` to close it. The remainder of the example is performed in the original command window, not the `git-bash` command window.
```

> ### Check the users have imported correctly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Check that the users have imported correctly
```

Author: fixed

Check the three imported users appear in your Okta Universal Directory.

1. In a browser window, sign in to `https://${DOMAIN_NAME}-admin.okta.com`. If you do not know your `${OKTA_DOMAIN}`, see [Values and Variables](/docs/reference/architecture-center/directory-coexistence/lab-prerequisites/#values-and-variables).

> 1. Choose **Directory > People**. You will see three users in addition to the users created in [Migrate users from an on-premises LDAP directory to Universal Directory](/docs/reference/architecture-center/directory-coexistence/lab-tutorial-2-ldap-server): **Admin Istrator**, **User One**, and **User2 Two**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Choose **Directory > People**. You'll see three users in addition to the users created in [Migrate users from an on-premises LDAP directory to Universal Directory](/docs/reference/architecture-center/directory-coexistence/lab-tutorial-2-ldap-server): **Admin Istrator**, **User One**, and **User2 Two**.
```

   <div class="full border">

>    ![Okta people directory with three users listed](/img/architecture/directory-coexistence/db-to-okta-auth-migration-user1-user2-admin-createdbyscript.png)

Reviewer: A big image. And not really necessary imo

Author: deleted

   </div>

   > **Note:** If you do not see the three users, refresh the screen.

   In the script, the user is imported and activated. [Activating a user account](https://help.okta.com/okta_help.htm?type=oie&id=ext_activate_user) sends an email to the user, informing them that their account is active and instructing them how to set up their account in your Okta org.

1. Select User One to see the applications they are assigned to:

   <div class="three-quarter border">

>    ![User 1 details, showing they are assigned to the okta-reference-coexistence-db-example application](/img/architecture/directory-coexistence/db-to-okta-user1-details.png)

Reviewer: Again, I think this image is unnecessary, but will defer to other/team/yourself

Author: deleted

   </div>

   > **Note:** Okta automatically manages a group called **Everyone**, which includes all users. The **Everyone** group also includes all applications. You may see different applications assigned to each user if you have completed other examples in this tutorial.

   You can select other tabs for additional information about each user.

## Update the application to use Universal Directory

Now the users have been mirrored in Universal Directory, you can reconfigure the application to use Universal Directory as its identity provider.

1. In the `okta-reference-coexistence-db-example` directory, stop the current running containers with <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>C</kbd>.

1. Remove the containers:

   ```bash
   docker compose down
   ```

> 1. Create an Okta OpenID Connect Application and register the application with Okta:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create an Okta OIDC Application and register the application with Okta:
```

   ```bash
   okta start
   ```

>    The `okta start` CLI command creates and registers an OAuth 2.0/OpenID Connect client with Okta. Okta considers this an OpenID Connect application. When this OpenID Connect application is registered, the `ISSUER`, `CLIENT_ID` and `CLIENT_SECRET` variables in the `okta-reference-coexistence-db-example/.env` file are updated for authentication with Okta, similar to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The `okta start` CLI command creates and registers an OIDC client with Okta. Okta considers this an OIDC application. When this OIDC application is registered, the `ISSUER`, `CLIENT_ID` and `CLIENT_SECRET` variables in the `okta-reference-coexistence-db-example/.env` file are updated for authentication with Okta, similar to:
```

   ```js
   ISSUER=https://dev-133337.okta.com/oauth2/default
   CLIENT_ID=0oa6iartjn5iuoKzr5d7
   CLIENT_SECRET=fF4BMQ0OhGp3D63s71BBTZoztIWqICdrCXBdkCtn
   ```

>    The sample web application in the Docker container uses the client ID and client secret to communicate with the Okta OpenID Connect application to use Okta as the identity provider. See [Values and Variables](/docs/reference/architecture-center/directory-coexistence/lab-prerequisites/#values-and-variables).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The sample web application in the Docker container uses the client ID and client secret to communicate with the Okta OIDC application to use Okta as the identity provider. See [Values and Variables](/docs/reference/architecture-center/directory-coexistence/lab-prerequisites/#values-and-variables).
```

1. Rebuild the application:

   ```bash
   docker compose build
   ```

1. Start the application:

   ```bash
   docker compose up
   ```

1. Open a private/incognito window and navigate to the same URL as before, `http://localhost:8080`. This time you are redirected to Okta to sign-in. Sign in with the user's email address and password: `user1@example.com` and `password`.

   <div class="half border">

>    ![Sign-in dialog including username and password fields](/img/architecture/directory-coexistence/db-to-okta-sign-in-to-db-example.png)

Reviewer: Unnecessary image

Author: deleted

   </div>

   When the user is authenticated by Okta, you will see the following displayed:

   <div class="three-quarter border">

   ![Successful sign-in response](/img/architecture/directory-coexistence/db-to-okta-successful-signin.png)

   </div>

## Account for hash types Okta does not support

> You can use the [Okta Password Inline Import Hook](/docs/reference/password-hook/) to import user records with an [unsupported password hash type](/docs/reference/api/users/#hashed-password-object) without needing to reset the user's password. The first time the user with an unsupported hash tries to sign in to your application, the following flow occurs:

Reviewer: A couple of other Password Import Inline Hook references you may want to reference, see this Guide: https://developer.okta.com/docs/guides/password-import-inline-hook/nodejs/main/

And this blog post: https://developer.okta.com/blog/2020/09/18/password-hook-migration

Author: Great links. Will add them to the resources page for the second iteration of the paper. Thanks

   <div class="full border">

   ![ngrok CLI detail output](/img/architecture/directory-coexistence/db-to-okta-ngrok-url-for-generic-db.png)

   </div>

### Activate the password inline import hook in your web application

The `pwimporthook-1` Docker container contains a Java application in the `/pw-import-hook/` directory. This application contains the password hook REST API call (`Post /pwhook`) and logic to validate the passwords.

The password import inline hook must be set up and activated within your Okta Admin Console:

1. Open the Admin Console for your org.
1. Choose **Workflow > Inline Hooks**.
1. Click **Add Inline Hook** and select **Password Import** from the dropdown menu.
1. Add a name for the hook. For example, _Password Import Hook_.
1. Set **URL** to your external service URL. Use the following syntax so that the **/pwhook** REST API is called on the external URL that ngrok generated. For example, `https://5d13-288-115-147-143.ngrok.io/pwhook`.
1. Set **Authentication field** to **Authorization**.
1. Set **Authentication secret** to **Basic dXNlcjp1c2UtYS1zdHJvbmctcGFzc3dvcmQ=**

>    > **Warning:** Don't forget the **Basic** prefix when entering the value into the **Authentication secret** field.

Reviewer: When I first started, I think it took me 3 days to figure out you need to add "Basic" to the value.

Author: Hopefully the Caution box immediately below will help emphasize that. :-)
